A couple weeks ago, Charlie Marsh and the folks at Astral made another big splash with a major
release of UV called UV Unified Python Packaging, which has many far-reaching features. We had to
have Charlie on the show to give us an inside look into this development. Let's get to it.
This is Talk Python to Me, episode 476, recorded September 3rd, 2024.
Are you ready for your host, Darius?
You're listening to Michael Kennedy on Talk Python to Me.
Live from Portland, Oregon, and this segment was made with Python.
Welcome to Talk Python to Me, a weekly podcast on Python. This is your host, Michael Kennedy.
Follow me on Mastodon, where I'm @mkennedy, and follow the podcast using @talkpython,
both accounts over at fosstodon.org. And keep up with the show and listen to over
nine years of episodes at talkpython.fm. If you want to be part of our live episodes,
you can find the live streams over on YouTube. Subscribe to our YouTube channel over at
talkpython.fm/youtube and get notified about upcoming shows.
This episode is sponsored by Posit Connect from the makers of Shiny.
Publish, share, and deploy all of your data projects that you're creating using Python.
Streamlit, Dash, Shiny, Bokeh, FastAPI, Flask, Quattro, Reports, Dashboards, and APIs.
Posit Connect supports all of them. Try Posit Connect for free by going to talkpython.fm/posit.
And it's also brought to you by us over at Talk Python Training. Did you know that we have over
250 hours of Python courses? Yeah, that's right. Check them out at talkpython.fm/courses.
Charlie, welcome back to Talk Python to Me. How are you doing?
I'm good. Thanks so much for having me back. It's always a pleasure to be on here.
Well, you are certainly making waves in the Python space these days with all of your projects
and their fastness. I think you're known as the fast Python guy these days.
Oh, that's not fast enough. We got to use something from Astral.
The fast Python tooling guy, maybe. Yeah.
Yeah, exactly. Exactly. So interesting. We spoke, I think you've been on twice before. Is that right?
We talked about Ruff once.
Came on once to talk about Ruff, and then I came on in March shortly after we did the first public
release of UV. Right, right. And UV at that time, I'll let you tell people what UV is, but for those
who know, it was kind of in the, it has pip-like features. And now it's got another layer to the
onion or another shell to it. And that's actually why I invited you back because there's a lot of
interesting things to talk about there. Yeah. Maybe like several more layers too.
Okay, well, let's hear about them. So first of all, I guess, not everyone, believe it or not,
not everyone listened to that first Ruff interview, R-U-F-F interview and those kinds of things. So I
suppose maybe quick introductions to you, Astral, how'd you get to where you are?
Totally. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So I've been working on Python tooling full-time for a little under
two years at this point. And my journey, I've been writing Python professionally for a long time,
but my journey with Python tooling started with Ruff, which is a very fast Python linter,
code formatter and code transformation tool. And the sort of foundational idea of Ruff was
can we make really fast Python tooling? And so Ruff is written in Rust, but you don't need to
have Rust installed or know anything about Rust to use it. You can just install it with pip or
with whatever you're using. And that whole sort of story for me started from just working with
Python a lot and asking if we could build sort of different Python tooling by using languages like
Rust. So the first version of Ruff was very minimal, but it's grown from then to have,
I don't know, maybe something like 800 plus rules. If you've used tools like Lake Eight or Pylint in
the past, Ruff can do similar things. So discover issues with your code without running it. It can
also fix them automatically. And then if you've used tools like Black in the past for code
formatting, Ruff can do a similar thing too, where it automatically formats your code.
So that was how I first got started in Python tooling. And also how I first ended up on
Talk Python was people were very interested in this when it came out.
And I think it broke a lot of people's minds in the sense that it really changed what was possible.
Maybe an analogy. So if you have unit tests, but to run the unit test takes 30 minutes,
there's no one who doesn't just want to kill time. Who's going to say, I made a small change.
Let me run the test and see how that change did. But if the test run in 50 milliseconds,
you could just set up a thing to just run the test every time code changes and just have a
green, red, white. And I feel like Ruff did that for linting and formatting.
Like for me, for example, I have it just run Ruff on, if I ask, I use PyCharm,
ask PyCharm to reformat the code. It just, it uses Ruff to do that. Or, and you can check the
box to just say, run it when I hit save, because you won't notice a difference. You know what I
mean? Yeah. Yeah. I think that's been one of the really interesting things about working on
tooling with the focus on performance has been like, if you build things that are way,
way faster than what currently exists, like not just like a little bit, but like significantly
faster, the ergonomics of the tool just change a lot. So maybe, maybe things that you only ran
in CI before you can now run locally and maybe things that you now run locally, you can run.
Yeah. On save as opposed to on, you know, on commit or on explicit command. So that's been a
big part of you know, what we've seen with Ruff. And, you know, the other big piece apart from
performance that we've been, that I think we sort of accidentally made a lot of progress on with
Ruff was just trying to make things simpler by bundling more stuff together. So Ruff can do like
a lot of different things. And so you don't need as many to chain together as many tools to get the
kind of setup that you might want to have in your Python projects. And so, you know, a lot of the
things we've built, you know, with Ruff and with UV, they've had these kind of dual goals of,
you know, being much faster, you know, hopefully bringing in some interesting new features and
functionality, but also trying to reduce a little bit of the, you know, the fragmentation and
tooling and make it easier for people, especially, you know, for newcomers who are writing Python for
the first time to kind of get started. And we have, you have announcements. I have things to
discuss with you about them, about making that even easier. So that's why some of the big features
of UV, right. For example, what if I don't have Python? Not a problem. So that's pretty, that's
pretty exciting, I think. Yeah. Yeah. And we'll get into that, but I do want to just take a, not
get too far past it because even though this episode is not about Ruff, two things. One,
a theme of Astrals is we're going to take some tools or some kind of concept that's been around
for a long time, redo it in Rust, but also not just, well, we ported over the code, but you know,
rethink some of the algorithms and some of the assumptions. And I think that's also a lot of
what makes it faster, like the way UV works with caching and things like that. Yep. And there's
been a lot of excitement and positivity about that, but I think there's also been a little
suspicion of, well, wait a minute. If, if we write this in Rust, is it really for Python people,
by Python people? Like what's, what's your take? I don't, I have, I have some thoughts that are,
I don't see it as a negative, but I think, I think it's interesting just to discuss,
you know, where does Rust actually belong here? Yeah. I mean, I think like the way I view it is
that you know, just like Python itself is, is implemented in C, like it makes some sense for
like the underlying tooling that people are using to be written in a different language. If it means
that you can ultimately build, you know, tools that are better, you know, at least on, on some
metrics that people care about. So like for me, I sometimes view what we're doing as, you know,
like we put all this investment into this tooling. We write all this stuff in Rust, which, you know,
in theory incurs some costs for us. Maybe, you know, maybe we move a little bit more slowly,
maybe it's harder. And in doing so, we kind of like give all these people who are running these
commands, you know, hundreds of times a day, a big boost in how they work. And they can keep
writing Python, but have a better and better experience writing Python. So, you know, I don't
think it actually really says anything personally. I don't really think it says anything about Python
that we write the tooling in Rust. Cause you know, we get, sometimes people will criticize
Python for that, but like, you know, different languages are useful and good for different
things. And Python is an incredibly productive language. It's like growing more and more every
year. People love writing it. But maybe it's not the best language to write, you know, a super high
performance package manager. And that's totally fine. Cause like, we're going to do that. And
everyone who's writing Python can benefit from it and can leverage it. Yeah. I do think that
one interesting piece here that I got, you know, we got a lot of skepticism around early on was like,
you know, how can people in the Python community like contribute to this if it's not written in
Python? You know, how do you like have a sustainable contributor base? And the interesting
thing for me is like, I actually think we've had a really strong contributor base over time. Like
we have, I don't know, like somewhere between four and 500 contributors total, maybe in Rust.
You know, most of those are like one or two small, you know, one or two commits, maybe just one or
two time committers. You know, but a lot of people have come to Rust and said, you know, I want to
learn Rust. I come from the Python ecosystem. There's a part of this that's sort of native to
what I know, which is the Python language, the Python semantics. And it's an entry point for
me to learn Rust, you know, from other people who come from Python. So, you know, I think there is
certainly a cost to engaging and a cost for contributors because most, you know, most of
our users don't know Rust. But I don't think it's as steep as people would expect. And I think,
you know, over time we have been able to grow a pretty healthy contributor base, like many people
who have never written Rust before. Yeah, I agree. And I was thinking the same thing that you
pointed out that Python itself is written in C. Right. Generally speaking, of course, there's
multiple runtimes and so on and so on. But CPython, the one that we generally use is written
in C. And I mean, I don't see why there should be an allegiance to C over Rust or anything. And a
lot of the data science tools are written in C or Fortran even, you know, something really wild
like that. And Python is a way to kind of expose them and make them more accessible, more useful,
make people more productive on top of those, that's a native code. Yeah, yeah. A third example
would be Jupyter, JupyterLab, Jupyter Notebook, all those things. When you talk to the contributors of
those projects, they're down in TypeScript and JavaScript most of their day. So the data science
folks don't have to write TypeScript and JavaScript. They just work in the tooling that's on the front
end. And so it's, you know, it's kind of like, to me, it's kind of like, let's take one for the
team. Yeah. We'll do this. So we all benefit, but you don't have to, you don't have to do it.
I actually think it's one of the kind of, one of the real strengths of Python is the
interoperability around like native code and extension modules. It's like a big,
it's actually like a big part of Python and it's a big part of why Python has succeeded.
And I think that will actually become more, I mean, this is sort of like going off on a tangent
a little bit, but I think that will become a bigger and bigger part of like what Python looks
like and what it looks like to work with Python. Because, you know, and I think Rust can actually
play an interesting role here because at least from my perspective, like I do not have a systems
programming background. Like I've not, I've definitely not written any C professionally.
I don't think I've ever really written any C++. And Rust was my first sort of foray into that
kind of programming. And I think at least for me personally, I found it much more accessible.
And so I think Rust and Python actually have this interesting story where Rust to some degree
is this kind of like superpower low level layer that you can drop into and then expose with a
Python CLI forever in a consume. So anyway, my prediction is I think that will only become more
and more of a part of what Python looks like. And that's actually, I think it's actually a good
thing. Yeah, I do too. I do too. Jake out in the audience, Jake Callahan, who says, and another
comment, "Great timing. I just released a video on these changes yesterday." So that's awesome.
But said, "The progress made in Ruff and UV sensor introductions clearly demonstrates that
there's a strong contributor base, even when it's based on Rust, right?" Yeah. Yeah. I think another
thing that it- I'm not trying to dismiss that it's hard to learn Rust because I actually think
it is pretty hard to learn Rust. And I think the learning curve is pretty steep. But I think the
thing we found is there are people who are interested and who want to do it. Sure. Sure.
Agreed. I think another thing that it shows, regardless of Rust or not, is if it's your
full-time job and there's funding and a team, rather than part-time work, it can go many times
faster towards the goal than before. I'm sure you've felt that way. Yeah. I mean, we're in a
very unique, I mean, not completely unique, but fairly unique position whereby we can fund people
full-time to work on this stuff. And it's actually just kind of wild to look at how much, not to sort
of talk up our own work, but just how much you can accomplish in a relatively short period of time
with that level of when people are kind of unlocked to work in that way and work on those kinds of
problems. So just thinking, it's like the amount of time we've been able to put into Ruff and UV
is sort of hard to fathom for some open source projects. It's like, wow, that's incredible.
But from the perspective of a company, it's actually quite reasonable. And in fact, not even
like that much. So I think it's pretty, like the leverage that you have with open source,
like when people are able to invest in it and really focus on it is pretty amazing because
we work on these things, we improve these things and they ship out to, I don't know,
millions of users or whatever it is, and really can provide a huge boost to the ecosystem.
So yeah, I mean, being able to work on this stuff full-time, that was actually something that I
decided pretty early on with Ruff was the project was growing more and more popular. And I was like,
I don't know if I can keep up with this if I don't work on it full-time. And so I'm at least going
to see where that goes. And if it's possible. - It's possible, right? And here you are.
- I mean, it is, but yeah, it's like, I mean, I just feel like I just have a lot of respect for
people who, you know, commit significant amounts of their time to open source alongside everything
else because yeah, it's, I mean, it's an amazing thing, but it's also very challenging and it's-
- Oh, it definitely is. - It's 24/7.
- Well, I think it's really positive that there's a group of people putting their full effort into,
especially the UV side of things. That's going to make a dent.
- Yeah, I mean, I think the other thing that's been cool about, you know, building this as a
company is that we've been able to bring in a lot of people from like outside of Python to come and
work on Python tooling. And I think that's like a really healthy thing for the ecosystem because
not only are these people, you know, I think like really talented and really great, but they also
bring like very different ideas and experiences. And so we have a lot of cross-pollination on the
team. The team's kind of a mix of people who fall everywhere on the spectrum of like, or axes,
I guess, probably not a spectrum of like how much Rust experience, how much Python experience they
have. You know, some of them have mostly worked in like TypeScript and the JavaScript ecosystem. So
that was sort of an intentional thing for me when thinking about like building a team to work on
this stuff was I want to have like some people on the team who are like super deep Python experts.
And I want to have some people who like bring a totally different perspective to the problems.
So that's been another like very cool piece of putting together a team to work on this stuff.
- I think that's a great perspective. This portion of Talk Python to Me is brought to you by Posit,
the makers of Shiny, formerly RStudio, and especially Shiny for Python. Let me ask you
a question. Are you building awesome things? Of course you are. You're a developer or data
scientist. That's what we do. And you should check out Posit Connect. Posit Connect is a way
for you to publish, share, and deploy all the data products that you're building using Python.
People ask me the same question all the time. Michael, I have some cool data science project
or notebook that I built. How do I share it with my users, stakeholders, teammates? Do I need to
learn FastAPI or Flask or maybe Vue or ReactJS? Hold on now. Those are cool technologies, and I'm
sure you'd benefit from them, but maybe stay focused on the data project. Let Posit Connect
handle that side of things. With Posit Connect, you can rapidly and securely deploy the things
you build in Python. Streamlit, Dash, Shiny, Bokeh, FastAPI, Flask, Quarto, Ports, Dashboards,
and APIs. Posit Connect supports all of them. And Posit Connect comes with all the bells and
whistles to satisfy IT and other enterprise requirements. Make deployment the easiest
step in your workflow with Posit Connect. For a limited time, you can try Posit Connect for free
for three months by going to talkpython.fm/posit. That's talkpython.fm/POSIT. The link is in your
podcast player show notes. Thank you to the team at Posit for supporting Talk Python.
One thing before we move on is talk about UV proper. Closing the loop here. You mentioned
those rules, those 800 Lint rules. And this resource you have over at docs.ashville.sh/ruf/rules
is awesome. So even if you don't use Ruff, you know, you care about say PEP8 naming or something,
you get a warning from Flake 8 or whatever, and it says, "Under function name." Like,
what is this error, right? What is this thing? And then you've got each one of these rules has a,
what is this? Why is it bad? How should you change it? Here's the bad version. Here's the
good version. And so on. And I think this is just a really good resource. I know you all put a ton
of time and energy into it. - I appreciate you calling that out. Yeah, it takes a lot of time.
I mean, once you cover all the rules, maintaining it incrementally is slightly easier. But,
you know, when we started this, we had a few hundred rules. And so, you know,
it was a lot of contributors who contributed us getting to full coverage here.
- It's almost like the Wikipedia of Lint rules or something.
- How to Python, yeah. Yeah, I guess maybe one thing I'll say is like, we have a lot of rules,
but you don't have to use them all. And like the default rule set is actually pretty small.
So even when I work on projects, I don't necessarily enable all of the rules. I typically
enable like a couple of subsets. So I just think sometimes it can be intimidating to imagine 800
rules being applied over your code base. So, you know, the default rule set is pretty small. It
covers things like unused imports, you know, things that are pretty common and relatively
unobjectionable. And then we have all these different categories for ways that you can
kind of level up the level of coverage. - Yeah. I take pretty much the defaults
as well on all my projects, except for wider lines of code, more columns.
- Yeah. Yeah. - On a 32 inch monitor,
80 columns is just a little corner. - We actually took that out of the defaults.
- Did you? Oh, beautiful. - Yeah.
- I don't need a rough dot toml or whatever it was I was putting in there for a configuration.
- Yeah. - Because the thinking there is like,
if you have long lines, they should generally be handled by a formatter, not a linter. So by default,
we don't enforce that. Yeah. - Okay. Interesting. And then the single
quotes versus double quotes, which we discussed on GitHub, I remember. I think we talked about
last time. - Yeah, probably.
- Maybe as well. Yeah. - I talked about that with everyone.
- Yeah. And Miguel also agrees here. Amazing docs. The rules are top-notch. Nice work.
- I appreciate that. - Okay. So I know we're going to talk
EV, but Kushar does have a good question out there. And I don't know if speak to it or don't
speak to it. Are there plans for Ruff to become a Pylance alternative? So a language server of some
sort. Is this anything that you're willing to talk about?
- I would say, I mean, yeah, I think that's like an interesting thing that we'll consider. It's
not something that we are committed to doing or committed not to doing, like building a language
server. I would say that's probably like a few steps away from where we are today. Because before
we would build a language server, we would probably build something like a type checker,
like something that could deal with type inference and better understand the relationships between
different parts of your code. I view that as like, it's not strictly a prerequisite to building a
language server, but I view that as like a little bit more of a path.
- More mypy. - Yeah, more mypy. I think there's
like a lot of interesting stuff around building a, well, first of all, of course, there's like
building a type checker, but there's also building what I would call like a type aware linter. Like
you could imagine that Ruff itself could actually get a lot more powerful if it could do all sorts
of type inference. Like we have some rules that are only supposed to activate on dictionaries
and we do some sort of bad local type inference and heuristics to figure out if we think a variable
is a dictionary. Like if you call not get on it, it might be a dictionary, right? So if we knew,
there's just a lot of interesting things we could do. We could build a much better tool. So it's not
just about building a type checker. It's also about how can we build a much better linter and
sort of like set of tools. But yeah, we're thinking about that a lot. There's a lot of
discussion happening about that, both internally and publicly on the repo and the Discord. We're
thinking a lot about sort of type inference and how to evolve Ruff in that direction. So yeah,
language server may be something we can do eventually. It's obviously a huge undertaking
and we want to make sure that like anything we decide to build, we feel a lot of conviction,
that it can be great because it doesn't necessarily make sense for us to try and build
something that we think is like 5% better than what's out there. It's very hard to get users to
switch to something that's 5% better. So when we look at the opportunity set, we're kind of thinking
about where can we have a big impact? What do users really want? Cross-referenced against where do we
think there's opportunity to build something that would be an improvement in ways that users care
about? So yeah, very interesting. Not something we're focused on right now, the language or piece
at least. Yeah. You guys are going to need at least a few weeks to get to that, huh?
We're going to need a few weeks to get to language server.
All right. Ivan out there in the audience says, "Excellent tool. Ruff and UV have changed my life."
I've talked about Ruff.
That's very nice.
Yeah. UV, maybe a quick summary for what it is and then we could talk about your post,
which adds layers of features and capabilities as we...
Yeah, totally.
So I came on the show back in March and we talked a bit about what UV was at the time.
We released UV in mid-February, so that was a couple of weeks after.
And UV is our Python packaging tool. And it's built under a lot of the same
design goals as we had for Ruff. So we wanted it to be extremely fast. We wanted it to try and
bundle a few more things together so that you could use fewer tools to work with Python and
be productive with Python. And we wanted it to be really easy to adopt. That was another principle
that we've thought about a lot. So when we released UV in February, it was framed as a PIP
alternative. So the idea was if you've used pip before, pip install, pip uninstall, or tools like
PIP compile or pip sync, it should be really familiar to you. So the API that we started with
was UV pip install, UV pip uninstall, UV pip compile. And it was meant to mirror the pip API.
And the idea there was we wanted it to hopefully be immediately obvious to people how this tool
works and what it does, and also, I guess, to some degree, what it doesn't do. So we released
that in February, and it grew extremely fast. It's just the adoption, both in terms of raw
numbers and just the companies that we talk to that are using it very quickly. A lot of people
were using it. I consider it a big success. I'm really happy with how that went. But it was also,
I think, a pretty small... It was sort of a small portion of what we wanted to build for packaging.
Ultimately, we weren't trying to build just a faster PIP. I think that's a really good starting
point for a couple of reasons. One, much easier for people to adopt. Two, it required us to build
a lot of the fundamental pieces that you need for Python packaging. In order to build a PIP
alternative, we had to be able to resolve Python dependencies, install Python packages,
understand virtual environments, manipulate all those things. We had to implement a bunch of
standards around introspecting, build distributions and source distributions and virtual
environments. So we had to invest in all these things that I view as fundamental primitives
of working with Python packaging. But the ultimate goal for us was always,
we want to build something that's a single static binary that you download and install,
that just gives you everything you need to be productive with Python. And from that perspective,
a pip alternative is pretty low level. And we wanted to build something that was a little bit
more high level, something that can install Python for you, something that can manage the
virtual environment for you, something where you just do run this file and it figures out the
dependencies, installs them, it creates the environments and it runs this file in the
environment. That is what we wanted to build. So that's what we've been building up to over
the past couple of months. Yeah. Amazing. Of course,
you've got to have the UV pip features as a foundation, right? Because even if you don't,
kind of like we talked earlier, even if you don't expose it directly as a CLI thing,
that from a project management perspective, it's needed, right?
Yeah. And it's part of meeting people where they are to a certain degree. Everyone has workflows
that are built around PIP. Even people that have other packaging workflows, often those
workflows are actually built around pip commands. And like I said, I view those as a little bit low
level. With PIP, the operations are kind of like, install this package into this environment,
as opposed to here are my dependencies, make sure the world is in sync with my dependencies.
That's what I would consider to be a little bit more high level. So we built and released that
PIP interface in February. And since then, it's basically been hammered by users. So it's just
gotten better and better, right? Because they find problems with it and then report them and it just
gets better. It gets faster. It gets more feature complete. So we've had a few months to kind of
improve it and build on top of it too. Yeah. That's one of the benefits of such,
it taking, they can hold so much and people using it so much as they hit the little edge cases all
the time and it gets smoothed out quick. Yeah. A lot of edge cases. Yeah. I bet.
Yeah. But it's super fun set of problems to work on, by the way, and really different from Ruff
too. Yeah. Ruff is more like a compiler. I would say we have a parser and a lexer,
all that kind of stuff. And with UV, it's a lot more, how do we do IO really fast? We have a lot
of networking. We're reading and writing from disk a lot. There's a lot of interfacing with
standards, a lot of interfacing with the registry, everything's async. So it's just a very different
set of problems. And it's fun to get to kind of work on both of them because they're just really
different. Yeah. I'm sure they're both fun projects and there's some really good ideas
and questions in the audience, but we're not ready for them. So I think when we spoke back in March,
one of the things we discussed is how you structured the CLI API in a way to leave space.
So for example, it's not UV install package, it's UV pip install package. And it's not UV
compile --update for dependence. It's UV pip file or whatever the command is. I have it
alias to a couple of letters and I never think about it again, but something that you've left
space in the CLI with these sub commands. And I think now we're starting to see why you left space.
Yeah. That was pretty controversial at the time and users really hated it.
I mean, they still used it, but it's so much better. A lot of people complained about it.
I even found myself saying, "Maybe we should stop doing this. Maybe we should just give up."
People were complaining and I was annoyed by it and stuff. But yeah, it's either a huge,
obviously, it's either a terrible mistake or it was genius. I don't actually know.
But what it did was, one effect, which I said before, was it immediately conveyed the rough
shape of the commands, like UV pip install. And then if you've used pip install, you know that
the next argument is a package name or a requirements file. But the other thing it did is
it left space in the CLI for these new APIs that are first-class UV APIs. So instead of doing UV
install when we released in February, it was UV pip install, which meant that today, this new set
of APIs that we launched, let's see, two weeks ago, I think today. Scroll up. Is there a date?
August 20th. So this new set of APIs that we released are UV lock, UV sync, UV run. They can
all be top level because they're really the first-class UV workflows. The pip API, by the way,
still 100% there and we're going to invest in it a lot and continue maintaining it because that is
how most people use UV. And maybe eventually we want that to be less true. We hope more and more
people use the new stuff, but we're going to keep building that. But for projects that can, we now
have this new interface that if you can fit into it, it's just sort of more powerful and does more
for you. So we saved space in the CLI exactly for this reason, which is we had a bunch of stuff we
knew we wanted to build. And if we polluted, well, not polluted is the wrong word, but if we polluted
the interface with UV install-
Clogged. If you clogged it.
Yeah. If we lost all that space to those existing commands, it would make things harder. So I think
it's worked. It's done. It's had the intended effect for us. It kept the space open. It let
people use it, conveyed how it works. And now they kind of exist alongside each other. And the pip API,
you can kind of use them together in certain ways. And when you use them together, you sort of
realize that the pip API is more low level. It's like the new APIs, you have a PyProject.toml file
with your requirements in it, and you just run UV sync and it will resolve them, create a lock file,
install them in a virtual environment. That's like one command. You could then modify the virtual
environment. You could do UV pip install, blah, blah, blah, and start making edits to it. That
kind of illustrates what I mean by it's like a low level pip APIs where you're kind of manually
manipulating things versus these higher level APIs where you tell us what your dependencies are,
and then we figure everything out for you.
Yeah, that's excellent. Just one comment on the, it's too many words or it's too long or whatever.
Like I hinted at before, I just have aliases for these. So for example, I just type PIR,
and that means UV pip install dash R requirements dot TXT. And like, I don't care if it's UV pip
that or it's pip install dash, like whatever. I don't want to type any of those. So it's just
three PIRs, let's go. And I've got three or four of those, one to make virtual environments with
UV and a couple of things like that. And one to compile the changes. And you look up for me,
I look up the docs, I go, okay, well, here's how I'm going to shorten that to something I never
think about again. So it doesn't matter.
That's totally fine. Right. That's totally fine.
But you do got to consider, I guess, the workflow for new people.
Yeah.
Maybe that's a good place to talk about the features here. So one of the things that really
so there's a lot here. One of the things that even though it's number three on the list of
four things is the Python command. So UV Python install UV Python list, all of those kinds of
things. I mean, maybe we should start there because without that we don't have any Python.
Although, yeah, so that runs sort of implicitly under some circumstances, right?
Correct. Yeah. So part of what we wanted to do with this release was make UV
sort of self bootstrapping, which sounds complicated. But the idea there is
if you don't have Python installed, UV doesn't depend on Python. It's just a binary.
So you download it. And then when you run a command like UV VM and you give us a Python
version, if you don't have any Python installed, if you don't have that version installed,
we will download and install it for you. So you can sort of seamlessly run these
commands without worrying about how do I install Python? Where's my Python,
et cetera, et cetera. Which means that we can achieve this really cool experience
where the whole set of commands you need to create a Python application are like,
you curl install UV and then you just run like UV init --Python. And we create a project
for you. We download and install that version of Python. You can just start running things.
You don't have to think about how do I install Python? How do I get it on my machine? Do I have
the versions I need? Anything like that. So you can obviously turn this stuff off, right? And
you can use your own... It also respect Pythons that you have on your machine already. But part
of the goal was we wanted to get to this, I won't call it the holy grail, but this experience of you
just download the binary, you do UV run and everything just works. So that was a big part
of it. And if you look at the full list of things that we put in this release, there's a lot of
stuff, right? There's four bullets of things that each of those could be a big release.
One is the Python installation. One is we have this sort of tool install, kind of like PIPX.
So if you want to install Ruff globally, you can do UV tool install Ruff and we'll install it for
you. It'll get put in your path, everything like that. We have these project management APIs that
I've hinted at a little bit throughout this conversation, like UV run, UV lock, UV sync.
Yeah, we'll get into it.
And we have this thing around script execution. So for a long time, I thought that these would
actually all be separate releases, that we would do a staggered series of releases. And I was
excited about that because, well, first of all, that's always fun. You kind of have a bunch of
things and you're shipping one week, one week, one week, and everyone's like, "Oh my gosh,
we're shipping so much stuff." But the thing we found was they're all kind of interconnected in
subtle ways. And the project management and the tool API, they're just not as interesting if you
don't have the Python. They are interesting, but the fact that we have the complete story of you
do UV run and we install Python, we've resolved your dependencies, we install your dependencies,
we run the command in the environment, that whole picture, everything's a little bit
interconnected. So that's how this release came to be so much stuff, is we had this vision for
what we wanted the full stories to be, and they all became somewhat interconnected. And in the end,
they're all individually, I think, really powerful things, but they kind of come together to give
this, what we want this Python experience to be. And we're not totally there yet. We're missing
stuff for sure. But this was our attempt to capture kind of a couple of different workflows
that are intertwined in different ways. Yeah, I see how they all interconnect,
but they are also interesting on their own. Yes.
The Python installation thing is interesting. And usable on their own, by the way.
Yeah, exactly. They're all independently. You just had one of those, you'd be like,
that's pretty cool. Okay, I like that. That's pretty cool. So let's talk just a bit more about
the Python one. So there's analogies here to other tools that people may know, and the closest one
for this would be pyenv, do you think? Yeah, probably. It's like, there are
obviously differences, but that's a very popular one that a lot of people know.
Yeah, yeah. I'm not saying they're identical, but it fulfills a role that a lot of people were
solving with it. Now, when I tried to do IENV, I don't remember what I was doing wrong, but this
was the early days of Apple Silicon. And maybe I had the Intel x64 version of Homebrew, but I had
the build tools for ARM. I can't remember, but I could not get it.
Trying to do something under Rosetta or something. Yeah, and I couldn't get it to install anything
with pyenv, because it would download it, it would try to compile it, then there'd be some
weird compiler bug. And I'm like, you know what, I'm not debugging the source of, I'm just not
debugging this. I'm out. I'm just going to go download it. And also, I compile Python for some
of the server stuff I'm doing, and it takes a while. It's not that fast. And when I get it from
you guys, if I say, "UV Python install 3.12" or something, boom, I get it. In your standard style,
it's fast. How is it fast? Yeah, so that comes down to a fundamental
difference between what we're doing and what Py... I don't know if it's pyenv or pyenv,
by the way. I think it's pyenv, by the way.
Okay, so I'm just going to say that, because that's what it means too.
Let's go with that. If I try to do the other, I will mess up.
So the way that pyenv typically works is, it's a great tool. A lot of people use it.
It's building Python from source. And there are trade-offs around this, but the idea is
it'll build the version of Python that you need. What we're doing is we're building a top of
project called Python Build Standalone, originally created by Greg Sork. And that's a project that
we've started contributing to. So I think I did the last two releases maybe. But the idea here is
we have these standalone, easily redistributable Python builds. And when we do a release,
it will create Python builds for a bunch of Linux architectures for macOS, for Windows,
on all the different Python versions. And it will also run a bunch of optimizations over it.
So it'll do... These acronyms, it's not important that you understand them, but it can do link time
optimization or LTO and profile guided optimization, PGO. So we build all the libraries-
That's pretty impressive.
Yeah, we do. That all happens in advance. So if you go to the releases page here,
like scroll up a little bit and just click the latest release. You'll see all the... Yeah,
like 773 artifacts. That's like 773 Python builds. So it's a lot of different Pythons.
Yeah, yeah. It's a lot of different-
Yeah, 773 different-
So we build all this stuff. And then when you run Python install, we figure out the correct...
See, we have like arm, we have all this stuff. So then we figure out the correct Python for
your machine, we just download and unzip it.
I see. The same way you get a wheel is the way you get this.
Yeah. I mean, it's actually the same code pretty much under the hood for us. It's like
we stream and unzip it down into disk. And that's great. It's super fast.
It's also... They're already optimized. PyEnv by default does not compile with optimizations.
You can compile with optimizations, but it's not what it does by default.
So these will be noticeably faster than what you would get by default with PyEnv.
There are some downsides. Some people like to build from source, right? They like to have
effectively the full chain of reproducibility in the build. And now you're kind of trusting
us to give you your Pythons. So that is a downside to some people.
Yeah. But then the next thing you do is you pip install something that has a binary wheel anyway.
Yeah. No, that is true. There are also a couple of quirks with these builds
that we're working on a little bit. Some of it has to do with licensing, the fact that you want
to have kind of a statically... You want to have a self-contained Python. And there are some things
in there that require licensing changes. So it uses all... There are some slight deviations from
what you would get with building from source from CPython. And those are documented in Python
build standalone. But the general idea is we pre-build and pre-optimize these Pythons. And
then we download them on demand and it makes it really fast.
Awesome. When I go to python.org and download a DMG package or an MSI for Windows or whatever,
it runs this installer process that takes a good long while. And Jake just pointed out
similar experience I had. It says it took me less than two seconds to install 3.10.
Same thing for 3.12. So what is... Are we missing anything compared to running a
proper installer that seems to take 20 seconds even on a fast computer?
I think those installers also have to do some operations from source,
most likely, because they're not shipping... I could be wrong about that. I haven't looked at
them closely. But Python in general, like Python.org, does not distribute these kind of
pre-built binary distributions for all these different architectures. And there's interest
in doing that. And I'm also interested in doing that. But there are some things that need to be
decided, standards that potentially need to be set. So it's possible that eventually we can just
grab these basically from python.org. I think our PyPy downloads come from python.org,
if I'm not mistaken. PyPy, that is. Or it actually might come from pypy.org. Now I can't remember.
Okay. Anyway, those come from some sort of official source. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
So, yeah. Maybe eventually. But for now, yeah, we're using Python build standalone and we've
just been trying to grow our familiarity with the project too.
Right. Okay. So let's give people a sense here. They do not have Python at all,
or they can't count on having Python or the right version of Python. They can run a single shell
command to get UV, which UV can then manage itself. They could pipx install the UV. Can you homebrew?
Yeah. What other ways can I get?
Yeah, you can get UV on your machine however you want. Like UV doesn't need to be in the virtual
environment that it's manipulating. It can just be anywhere on your machine and it can operate
on any environment. External tool sort of deal. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. So once you have that.
You can install it with pip. We have our own standalone installers that you can curl.
It's on homebrew, right? You can install with pipx. You can install however you want.
And then ultimately it can operate on any environment on your machine. So I actually
don't recommend installing it in a virtual environment. I recommend installing it globally.
Yeah. That's how I have it as well.
Kind of working from there. Yeah.
I believe I've pipx installed it because anything that falls into that category for me goes under
pipx, at least for now. Yeah.
We'll talk about that in a minute.
I mean, one interesting thing is if you use our installers, like the curl installers,
then you get access to self updates. So you can run UV self update and we will update to
the latest version. That's right.
Because I tried to try that. We can't really do that if you, yeah,
you can't do that if you installed through a different package manager because we don't
really know how it was installed. So if you install it through the installer, right, we
write a receipt that we understand where we installed it and all that kind of stuff.
Yeah. So that's one benefit,
but it's not, you're not required to do that, of course.
Sure. I ran into that when I, I just wanted to see what it would do. I ran a self update
and it's, it said, you installed this from a package manager type thing. So go do that
thing. But that's fine. I have automation for like all those things. So it's not a big deal.
So to give people a sense, like once UV is on your system and in the path, you can say UV
VNV --Python and put up some variation of a Python version. And if you have it, great,
it'll use it right to create the virtual environment. If you don't have it, it will
then do this two second download install deal. Assuming you have fiber and then create a virtual
environment based on it. Right. Yep. That's right. And you can turn that off, but that is
the default behavior. Yeah. That's awesome. And you can also pass a commands like a managed only,
I think it is, or something like that, where you say, don't use the system Python, even.
Yeah. Yeah. Only use the ones that UV will install or like only use the Pythons that
are on my machine, ignore UVs, Pythons, or some customizations around that.
Right. Like you could do the opposite. What an advantage that is.
I will also say this version, by the way, this version format request thing is like so hard.
Yeah. It's just like, you'd just be shocked like how much engineering work has gone into like
understanding those requests and then discovering all the Pythons on your machine. And the
discovering all the Pythons in your machine part problem, by the way, is a problem that like a
bunch of tools have had to solve. And we've talked with like the VS Code team about fast Python
discovery, because there's just like so many different places that it could be. And like
on Windows, it's also like totally different than on Unix. So anyway, a lot of work has gone into
that, but it's kind of like hilariously flexible now. Like you can say, yeah, you can say CPython
greater than or equal to 3.12. Right. And then we'll look for CPython rather than PyPy or rather
than GrailPy. So anyway, a lot of work went into that. What if I just say UV, VENV and I have no
Python whatsoever? I think we would install the latest Python. Would you just go, yeah, just do
an, a latest, like maybe a, an implicit --Python space three. Yeah. I think that would
count as give me any Python from the list of downloads and then we sort by version. So I think
you would effectively get the latest compatible version, but now you're kind of quizzing me a
little bit. So I don't mean to be. I'm just kidding. All right. So we'll move on. I know
there's so much more and we're, we don't have a ton of time to get it, but I just pulled up my,
my warp terminal and I typed UV Python list and it shows me a bunch of options for arm 64 for MacOS
3.12.5, 3.12.0, 3.11.9, 3.10.3, 8 and so on that I could pick. However, I'm just wondering where
your cutting edge needle setting is going to go here. I don't see a three of 13. Yeah. And one of
the things that is tricky about any of these package package manager stories is if I homebrew
it, I'll see that there's a new Python, especially a major release, but I might have to wait a week
before it's available on homebrew and, but homebrew auto updated. But if I install it from
the installer from python.org, it won't auto update it. And you know, there's just, there's
always a little drawback of it. And so when I saw this feature, I'm like, well, if this thing could
just really soon have the newest one, that would just be icing on the cake. And so what is your,
what is your policy on how quickly to adopt new things? How quickly to adopt release candidates
and betas and things like that? Yeah. Like with 3.13, I mean, I would like to have it out as
soon as there's an RC that that's what I would like to do. Our policy or our, our goal is to
make sure that it's out before the stable release. So we would like to not be lagging on the stable
release. And you know, we view like the, the minor releases in Python similarly in rough
historically, like we'll be like, okay, we want to make sure that we support all the 312 language
features before 3.12 is stable. And there were like a bunch of language features in 3.12. There
was like some new grammar, there were new typing features. And so the goal there again, was like,
the goal is to have it out by time it's stable. So that's typically like the contract we try and
uphold. And that's still our plan for 3.13. Okay. Awesome. Yeah. Good to know.
Jay says it would be, it would be nice to have an option to install pre-release builds.
And Tushar says the thing is Python build standalone builds 600 releases per version
number, having that run daily is too much, but if anyone could do some interesting caching,
surely the Astral folks could do some sweet caching.
It's kind of amazing though, that project runs, it's not like we don't, we don't own it. It's
not under our org. That project runs completely for free on GitHub action.
Wow. Isn't that kind of crazy, isn't it?
Yeah. GitHub is ridiculous.
Yeah. So anyway, that's kind of cool.
How much traffic it handles and yeah, how much data. Yeah. They're, they're pretty awesome.
Okay. So if you don't have Python, you can also, you don't have to do a VNV, you can just say UV
Python install, give it a version and then you'll just have that. Like that's what
Jake and I were referring to earlier, but you can also create a VNV. And this is sort of a
philosophy that I'm, I'm getting, and sorry, someone said this earlier, but it's scrolled
off the live stream comments that this prefer or require virtual environments by default,
rather than prefer to try to jam stuff into system Python or the core Python. And then
it could be a virtual environment if you really know the incantations.
Yeah. Yeah. That's probably like, you know, when we did the release in February,
we tried to steer pretty closely to the way pit behaves to make it easy for people. But we did
pick a few battles where we wanted to intentionally diverge. And this was, this was one of the bigger
ones, which is UV by default requires a virtual environment. So if you try and UV pip install,
and there's no, we can't find a virtual environment in the current directory or an
active virtual environment, we'll throw an error. And you can opt out of that by passing a system
flag, but unlike pip, right, it's opt out. So you have to, by default, it uses a virtual environment
and you can escape from that if you want to intentionally. So we're trying to like with
these APIs too, like these are all virtual environment. Well, the tool stuff is, it is,
but in a different way, like UV run, UV lock, UV sync, these all create a virtual environment
in the project directory where the project is defined by a Py project. So if you run UV run
in that directory, it will look at the dependencies, resolve them, create a lock file,
create a virtual environment, install their locked versions into the virtual environment,
run the command. And it does that every time, but it's so fast that we will hopefully so fast
that we can do it. So like if the dependencies haven't changed, it will still make sure that
everything's up to date. So if you just use UV run, we try and keep the whole environment
in sync for you. And you don't have to think about how do I manage my environment? How do
I activate it? How do I install stuff? But we're pretty like, we're pretty pro virtual environment.
And one thing I want to do, and it's sometimes hard to hold these lines because you have users
who come to you and want something really different. And it can be hard not to say yes
to a lot of the things that users want. But some lines, I think we have to hold because
if we concede on them, sorry, I'm making it sound like a battle, but if we concede on them,
it just limits the things we can do in the future. Like if we make things too flexible,
it limits some of the possibilities of what we can do in the future. And like one thing that I
kind of want to change the perception around is, I think virtual environments are, they're here to
stay really. And so we embrace them, but I want to change some of how people think about virtual
environments. In particular, I want to change this whole idea of activating a virtual environment.
I want it to feel more like node modules, which people don't necessarily think highly of node
modules. I think when people think of node modules, they think of a huge node modules folder
with like a ton of bloat. But the idea there is like, when you're in a project, you just sort of
run commands and all the packages just get installed there. And it just runs in the correct
environment with the correct dependencies. And that's actually what I kind of want. That's
actually what I want Python to feel like is, yeah, there's a virtual environment, but it's
actually just kind of like the directories. It's kind of just like full of packages, full of your
dependencies. And you just use the right one at the right points in time. So that's part of the
shift that I want us to move towards a little bit. And it's part of why we're a very virtual
environment first and why we put the virtual environment right in the project in a specific
known place, because we want to get away a little bit from this idea of where's the environment?
How do I activate it? Do I have the wrong one activated? I want it to feel a little bit more
like it is just sort of native to how the project works. If you're in the context of that thing,
then it just uses the right one. Do you have intentions to do something? I can't remember
the path, but something to the effect where if you're in a directory and there's no PyProject
TML or virtual environment, but if you went up one or two, if we're both, would it fall to that
one or would it just go? We do do that with UV run. So with UV run, we sort of find the root of
the project. We'll look up at parent directories. But if you just run Python, blah, blah, blah,
obviously we don't hook into anything there. And so, like with a lot of other things, like with UV
run, UV lock, UV sync, we create a virtual environment. If you use our commands, it's
kind of just like everything just works. But you can also just activate the virtual environment and
do whatever you want, because we're kind of trying to embrace the fact that virtual environments are
ever knows, not ever knows how to use them, but people are familiar with them. Editors and tooling
revolve around them. So things that try to eject from virtual environments tend to cause a lot of
problems for editors and workflows. So part of embracing virtual environments, I think again,
is meeting the ecosystem where it is a little bit and being like, okay, the fact that we use
virtual environments and they're just in your project means that you don't need a special
editor integration to use UV. PyCharm will just let you use that virtual environment,
just a normal virtual environment, in this perspective. So that's, again, part of what
we're trying to do is build things that just work for people and try and embrace the standards and
the conventions while also maybe influencing or changing parts of them that we think could be
improved or could be made more user-friendly. Yeah. I don't know why I didn't book you for
a two and a half hour podcast, because that's what we're going to need. So Vincent from Calm
Code says, "UV run is such a game changer. He may work on a Jupyter runner for that this week.
Feels like such a game changer," which is awesome. Cool. Yeah. There's a lot of cool ideas too around
this sort of... Sorry, go ahead. Well, I was going to say with that in mind, let's dive into
this whole project management stuff here. Right? Like this is, I think this is one of the three
big pieces of functionality that comes through. And you've been talking about this sort of,
some of the features like UV run and so on, but let's talk through, let's talk through...
Yeah. I want to create a project. I don't have the Python installed. It's a new project. I want
to create a pyproject.toml, but I don't remember the format for that. Let's go. How's that work?
So we have a series of commands that kind of manage the project lifecycle for you. So you
can run uv init to create a new project. And it has a couple of flags based on whether you want
to build a library or a command line application, whether you want it to be structured as a Python
package or just kind of, maybe it's just an application that you're running on your machine.
But uv init will create the project. You can then run uv add, flask, uv add, FastAPI, whatever,
to add dependencies. And when you run uv add, it will automatically generate the lock file
and sync the dependencies to your system. So we do have commands like uv lock to generate the
lock file and uv sync to download the correct dependencies into your environment. But you can
also just kind of use these lifecycle commands and uv will make sure that everything's in the
right state as you go. So you can run uv add, uv run. If you do uv run and then Python, blah, blah,
blah, what happens behind the scenes is we resolve the dependencies, we make sure the environment's
up to date, and then we run that command in the environment. So the whole lifecycle of working
with your project can be managed through uv init, uv add, uv remove, uv run. There's a lot that goes
into that. And there's also a lot of kind of powerful features built in here too. Like when
you run uv run, it accepts a flag --with. So you can do uv run --with and put a
dependency there. And it will basically just download that, put it in an ephemeral virtual
environment and make it available for the command. So you can just pull in one-off dependencies as
you need to run things. Like I never actually think about activating environments anymore.
Like most of the time when I'm running Python commands to run one-off tooling, I'm running
uv run --with requirements and I give it a requirements file. And then I pass the name of
the file I want to run. And it just builds the thing you need and runs the command and then
throws it away. And because you have, again, we were talking at the beginning of this episode
about how really fast tools change the ergonomics. Part of what we're trying to build here is if we
have this packaging system, that's really fast, especially for like repeated operations. Like
I need to keep pulling in, I've downloaded this package before and you download it again,
use it for this one command. Like we can just like throw away virtual environments and create
new virtual environments in like in milliseconds. Yeah. If this was a Python dash M V E and V sort
of, it would be way too much overhead. Yeah. Yeah. And so we can just like, even like a bunch of
dependencies, like as they've been installed in your machine already, it's really, really fast
just to pull these things together, use them and throw them away. So there's just a lot, there's a
lot of things that we can do. And I think even like looking forward to the future, there's a lot
of things we can do because we have this like performance foundation. Like, you know, I'm
thinking about what if you want to test code on like a bunch of different Python versions. Yeah.
And maybe you don't want to like have to keep destroying and recreating your virtual environment
or something like that. Like there's just, there's a whole lot of stuff that we can build
that would be really hard to imagine if you didn't have a really fast tool.
Yeah. It's a chain. It definitely changes what's possible.
Too sure out there, put it on an example that it's very near and dear to my heart.
You know what would be great? If UV could build standalone binaries and embed Python into them.
Yeah. It's not something we've built anything around, but yeah, I know it's being described
there. Yeah. I think one of the, what I've seen most of the things do is we'll do something like
zip up a virtual environment or site packages or something and then put that in a binary. And then
when you run it, it'll spit that out or maybe do a memory mapped sort of magic to try to map into
that and unzip it into memory or all sorts of weirdness. And I think really for this to be
easy, some somewhere along the way, I could be wrong, not a core developer, but I feel like
Python's import behavior needs to be able to import from an embedded resource in a compiled binary
rather than sticking to binary and have the binary do like weird things where it fakes out the path.
Cause there's always like something that falls apart. But if the pip itself, like, okay, we can
import from a memory stream and not just from file system, then these things would be like, oh, well,
if that's the case, here's how you just embed those. And off it goes, you know, it'd be more
like go or say, here's your one thing you run it. You know what I mean?
Yeah. Yeah. There's definitely interesting stuff to explore there. And there's some
interesting tools that exist already to try to facilitate some of those things.
Yeah.
It's also, we've invested time in yet though.
Yep. All right. Well.
Yeah. I was thinking PyApp is similar. Yeah.
Yeah. PyApp is definitely, I've used PyApp before. Actually I have an app running in my system right
now. It's in a little menu bar thing. That's a PyApp app and it works well. It does work well.
Yep.
Okay.
So the project API is kind of like, you know, if you've used like poetry or PDM,
like these tools that are oriented around working on a project and you have a PyProjectTOML that
defines your dependencies and you might have some sort of structure. It's based around that kind of
workflow of working on a project, which, you know, is that's like one way that people work with
Python, but there's a lot of ways, there's a lot of things that people do with Python, which is
why we have a couple of different APIs. Right. So we also have this tool API, like UV tool install,
UV tool run, which we've aliased to UVX. These are for running.
This is interesting. Yeah.
Yeah. These are for running like one-off, not one-off commands, but like things that you want
installed globally. So like you might want rough installed globally on your machine so you can run
it on a bunch of different projects. We call those like tools and you install them, you know,
similar if you've used PipX before, we install them into dedicated environments
and put them on your path. And there's a lot of really cool stuff here. Like I now use UVX all
the time when I want to run things. So I'll do like UVX rough check and that translates to UV
tool run rough, you know, run the check command. And behind the scenes, what it does is it finds
latest version of rough, it creates an environment with that version, and then it runs the command
using the rough binary in there. And there's really no overhead to that if you're kind of
running it repeatedly. So, you know, this is oriented around like a different way of working
with Python, where you have these tools that you need to run on your machine and you use them for
different things. So we have like the project interface for working on a project. And then
we have the tool interface for running Python, you know, command line tools.
Yeah. So UVX run, well, UVX is the run version. You've also got the install. I have some thoughts
of when I might do one or the other, but UV tool install seems like something you might want to run
and have around and have auto-complete in your shell. So I could type R U tab and get rough or
I could UV tool install.
I think for things you're going to run repeatedly, it makes a lot of sense to install them.
Also, if you have like, if you ran UV tool install rough, and then you ran like UVX rough,
we would use the installed version. So if you already have the tool installed, we'll still
pull the installed version, assuming it's compatible with the version request that you made.
So like, yeah, I generally like UV tool install things that I'm going to run, you know, multiple
times. The other really nice thing about UV tool install is we have UV tool upgrade. So you can do
like UV tool upgrade --all, and we'll upgrade all the installed tools. So you don't
have to think about like, which tools do I have installed? Like what versions are they at? Are
they out of date? So it kind of gives you a way to manage all the Python tools that you're using
at a kind of global level. So, you know, we have a lot of commands like in our docs,
we have a lot of like automation tooling built around Python, like, you know, rough and UV
are written in Rust, but a lot of our like documentation tooling, like we have a lot
of scripting in Python. And all of our docs now in the doc string at the top have like the UVX
command that you run to like run the script. Nice. And so I just like copy that and paste that and
then the script just runs with all of its dependencies. So it's like, it's just super.
It's just very, very convenient. I think like all these are API's and the way they come together.
And there's a lot I know it's a lot of different stuff. And that was actually my biggest fear with
this release was it's hard to succinctly explain what this release is, because it's a lot of
different things. And it's not like when we released UV in February, when we released UV
in February, it's like, this is a new tool. If you know pip, you understand what this is, right?
It was much easier to explain, I think, in a succinct way, like what we're doing. And in this
release, it's like, it's actually like a lot of different stuff that comes together to tell what
I think is a very coherent story. But it's hard to succinctly explain exactly what we did. And
I was very, like the response to it, I was really heartened to see that people were like getting it
and they were getting different parts of it. Like different parts of it were speaking to different
people, because I actually think different parts of it are like relevant to different ways that
people work with Python. So a lot of people were excited about the lock files, the UV run. A lot
of people were excited about the fact that we have this like scripting API, so you can like have
these standalone scripts where the dependencies are embedded in them. And if you do UV run that
script, we just resolve the dependencies, download them and run the script with those
dependencies available. So you can have these like hermetic Python scripts. We had the Python
install API. So there were just different things that were resonating with people, which I think
is what made me happiest in the response to it. Did you read, I'm sure you read Armen's,
Rye and UV, August is harvest season for Python packaging. Yeah. Yeah. That's a pretty positive
take and a pretty wide ranging recommendation there. It's pretty interesting. Yeah. The
relationship with Rye is something we get a lot of questions about. And I think like when we took
over Rye, the goal was always like, we want to build UV up until to be a suitable replacement
that people can migrate from Rye to UV. And we're getting further along that path, but there's still
like things we're missing. We don't plan on like deprecating Rye anytime soon, but all of our like
new feature development is really happening in UV and Rye it's mostly like bug fixes, like keeping
things up to date. So, Rye has actually benefited a lot from UV because it uses UV under the hood.
So like Rye has just gotten like there's new features or it's gotten faster. But our goal
is really to like find the things that are missing from Rye and make sure we can support them in UV.
Yeah. Last one we've got to cover here is, Yovheni points out single file scripts with
dependencies. That's the last one, the script execution. So yeah, this is a huge problem.
One of the reasons I think Tushar was suggesting it, and I'm also really excited about it is if you
could bundle your code into an application, one of the benefits is you don't have to have a
conversation with everyone that runs it. How to do virtual environments, how to do package management,
all this kind of stuff. You just say run, click it or whatever. And somewhat short of that is I
want to give you just a script of some sort, but and just say run this, right? Here's the script
of app, you have an example.py to run that. But if you put some sort of magical incantation, which
it's backed by a PEP to say what it actually requires, then UV --script something,
it'll just see that and go, okay, or UV run rather. It'll see that, install the pieces
ephemerally, right? And run. That's pretty cool. Yeah, exactly.
So as our kind of our last thing before we run out of time.
It's really cool. So this is backed by a pep. I think it's 723, if I recall correctly. So this
is like a standardized, this syntax at the top of the file is standardized. Might not be mentioned.
Somewhere. Yeah. There's a bunch of PEP conversations, but not the one.
Yeah. We sometimes try and like shy away from talking about user facing features in terms of
peps. Yeah.
It's because-
There you go, 723, that's it.
Yeah. Okay. Well, there it is. But anyway, the, so the idea here is like,
you can declare the dependencies for the script, right in the script. And then when you do UV run
that script, we read that dependency data and we run the script in an environment with those
dependencies. So the other, I think really cool piece here is I talked before about UV add. So
if you're in a project with a PI project, Tom, you can do like UV add best API or whatever,
but you can also do that for scripts. So if you scroll, if you look for like UV add dash dash
script, so you're referred to this like magical incantation at the top. We will actually like
create that for you. So if you do UV add --script, and then the script name and the
dependencies, like we'll actually just like put that stuff in there for you. So you don't actually
have to like remember how to do that. Like you can just do UV run --script, and we will
actually like populate that field. So you can create a script, you can manage the dependencies
in it with UV, you can run it. This is like super useful. There's some interesting conversations
happening now too around like, what if we want to have a lock file for these? Because it's a little
bit different, right? This is the list of dependencies. It's not the list of resolved
versions. So if you wanted to have like full reproducibility, you probably want a lock file.
And not just these things versions, but they're the transitive closure of all the dependencies.
Everything they depend on. Yeah. So, you know, we do that for projects. Like if you do UV lock
in a project, we create this lock file. That's all the transitive dependencies. It locks the
exact URLs, the hashes, the versions, everything. We don't do that right now for scripts just because
there's no, there isn't really a place to put it. But we're kind of thinking about.
Have you considered the Windows registry? I mean, you could always just like integrate that and
import that over to Mac and Linux. That'd be fine. Yeah. Just put everything in the Windows registry.
Yeah. That's a winning idea. No, I totally get it.
Yeah. I mean, the other thing that's interesting too is like the notebooks, like people are
thinking about how can we add this kind of functionality to notebooks and you know,
being able to declare the dependencies for a notebook, right in the notebook, being able to
lock them too. It's a lot of cool stuff that we can build now that we have all these primitives
connected. Yeah, for sure. I mean, you could do something like take a hash of the file and then
use that hash as the name and as long as the file doesn't change, it'll run the same. I don't know.
Yeah. Yeah. I'll leave that to you all.
So I think, I mean, we didn't even talk about the speed for some of these things and there's,
there's a whole lot of stuff here, but. There's a lot of good stories to tell about
how we made some of these things. The problems we had to solve to like really some of this stuff,
but they'll make for, you know, if I dream, they'll make for good blog posts. In reality,
they'll probably make for good Twitter threads. Absolutely. All right. Well, Charlie, thanks for
being here. Maybe give us a final thoughts and words for folks who are interested in this,
this new layer of UV. Yeah. I mean, I think like this is, this release is really different from
the previous release in part because we designed and built a lot of stuff that's pretty new for
people and also requires people to, to change their workflows in a lot of cases. Like the
previous release, it was like, this is a lot like pip, so kind of just drop it in. And now it's like,
here's a bunch of ways to use this tools. If you were, you, it does require you to work a certain
way and kind of think a certain way, but we think it's really powerful. And that's all stuff we're
like kind of trying to figure out. Right. So we're very eager for, you know, I'm sure, I'm sure all
this stuff will change and I'm just eager for like, like every release. I'm just excited to have it
out, have people testing it, have people using it so we can get feedback. And so, you know, I, I
would love for you to try it out. I'd love you even more for you to come file issues about the
things that don't work so we can make it better and better. But I think we have a really cool
foundation here. We can build a lot of things that hopefully make working with Python a lot,
you know, a lot easier in the sense that the tools kind of get out of your way rather than
getting in your way. So yeah, that'll be our focus for the next, for the next while is, is seeing how
people are using this stuff and seeing where we can make it better. Well, I think it's pretty
awesome what you all are up to. Big fan of UV. So happy, happy to see the project. Thank you.
Progress here and always happy to have you on. So thanks. Thank you. Yeah. See you later. Bye.
This has been another episode of Talk Python to Me. Thank you to our sponsors. Be sure to check
out what they're offering. It really helps support the show. This episode is sponsored by Posit
Connect from the makers of Shiny. Publish, share, and deploy all of your data projects that you're
creating using Python. Streamlit, Dash, Shiny, Bokeh, FastAPI, Flask, Quarto, Reports, Dashboards,
and APIs. Posit Connect supports all of them. Try Posit Connect for free by going to
talkpython.fm/posit. Want to level up your Python? We have one of the largest catalogs of Python
video courses over at Talk Python. Our content ranges from true beginners to deeply advanced
topics like memory and async. And best of all, there's not a subscription in sight. Check it
out for yourself at training.talkpython.fm. Be sure to subscribe to the show. Open your
favorite podcast app and search for Python. We should be right at the top. You can also find
the iTunes feed at /itunes, the Google Play feed at /play, and the direct RSS feed at /rss on
talkpython.fm. We're live streaming most of our recordings these days. If you want to be part of
the show and have your comments featured on the air, be sure to subscribe to our YouTube channel
at talkpython.fm/youtube. This is your host, Michael Kennedy. Thanks so much for listening.
I really appreciate it. Now get out there and write some Python code.